
Nomeclature for simple compounds.

If the compound has metal and nonmetal elements, the first element is the metal followed by the nonmetal. Metals are named first and its name is unchanged.


(!)Considerations:
Is the compound ionic or molecular?
    if ionic, does the metal form ions of one type (has fixed charge)
        or does the metal form more than one type (variable chare).
    are the ions monoatomic or polyatomic?

    if molecular, does it contain hydrogen? 
        if it contains hydrogen, does it also contain oxygen?


(!)Rules by category:

(category: Binary Covalent Bonds)
1. The general rule in deciding what element is named first is:
The element with the lower group number is written first. 
Except when the compound contains oxygen and a halogen, the name of the halogen goes first.



(category: Only has Monoatomic ions)
1. If the compound is binary with monoatomic ions, the compound name is:
    cation name (name of first element, which should be metal) + anion name (name of nonmetallic element) with its ending replaced by the suffix "-ide"


(category: Has Polyatomic ions)
1. Compounds containing polyatomic ions are named similarly to those containing only monatomic ions, except there is no need to change to an –ide ending,
 since the suffix is already present in the name of the anion

 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Atomic Number: 
Number of protons in the nucleus. Number increases from left to right (by columns), and top to bottom (by row).  Protons are what determine the element. Never lost or gained.

Mass Number:	
Is the atomic mass rounded to the nearest whole number.

Atomic Mass:	
increases from left to right and top to bottom. Upper left corner is the lightest. Bottom right corner is the heaviest.

Number of Neutrons = Mass number – Atomic Number

Isotopes: Atoms of the same element with a different number of neutrons.

Element Groups: Elements in the same group have the same number of electrons in their outer shell. 
Vertical Columns:	1 through 18.

Period: Each row is a period. Elements in the same period have the same number of shells. The number of shells is equal to their period. 
Horizontal Rows:	1 through 7.

Element Family: By Color. Metals, semimetals and nonmetals. With Metals on the left side. Non-metals on the right side and semimetals in-between them. 
By colors.

Source: https://www.thoughtco.com/element-families-606670


Family Groups: Determined by elemental properties.  (Colored)
Metals - solid at room temperature, conduct heat and electricity, and are malleable and ductile
Nonmetals - These elements are usually gases at room temperature but may also become a solid or liquid at certain temperatures. don’t conduct heat or electricity, and are non-malleable.
Semimetals - Mixture of both metal and non-metal properties.

Element Groups: Determined by # of electrons in the outer shell. (Numbered Rows)
MAIN GROUPS: Alkali Metals, Alkaline Earth Metals, Transition Metals, Halogens, Noble Gases

Alkali Metals: 			Group 1 (IA)  	1 valence electron
Alkaline Earth Metals: 		Group 2 (IIA)  	2 valence electrons
Transition Metals: 		Groups 3 -12 	d and f block metals have 2 valence electrons
Boron Group or Earth Metals: 	Group 13 (IIIA)  	3 valence electrons
Carbon Group or Tetrels:  		Group 14 (IVA)  	4 valence electrons
Nitrogen Group or Pnictogens:  	Group 15 (VA)  	5 valence electrons
Oxygen Group or Chalcogens:  	Group 16 (VIA)  	6 valence electrons
Halogens:  			Group 17 (VIIA)  	7 valence electrons
Noble Gases: 			Group 18 (VIIIA) 	8 valence electrons


Element Groups and Family Groups are often the same since the number of electrons in the outer shell, the valence electrons, are largely responsible for elemental properties.



Source: https://www.westfield.ma.edu/personalpages/cmasi/gen_chem1/nomenclature/ionic_nomenclature.html
Name ionic compounds
A. Naming compounds with type I cations-type I cations are cations that have one possible charge.
All the elements in the first two families form type I cations. A few of the elements in groups 3 though 13 form only one cation; therefore, a few of them are type I cations-examples include Ag+, Cd2+, Zn2+, and Al3+.
The cation is named first.
If the cation is a "simple" cation ("simple" ion is made from only one element.) the cations is named after the element.
If the cation is a polyatomic cation (a polyatomic ion is made from two or more covalently bonded elements.) you use the name that you have memorized (however, since we only talk about a couple of polyatomic cations this should not prove to be too difficult. NH4+ is the ammonium ion. The Hg22+ cation is a polyatomic ion and a type II cation.). 
The anion is named second.
If the anion is a simple ion it takes its name from the root name of the element , and "-ide " is added.
If the anion is a polyatomic anion you use the name that you have memorized.
NaCl, MgCl2, AlCl3, NaNO3, BaSO4, (NH4)2SO3

B. Naming compound with type II cations-type II cations are capable of having several charges.
If the cation is not from group 1 or 2, or is not Ag+,Cd2+, Zn2+, or Al3+ then assume the cation is a type II cation.
The cation is named first and the charge of the cation is expressed as a Roman numeral.
Occasionally suffixes, -ic and -ous, are used; however, we will not be using them. -ic is for the higher charged cation, -ous is for the lower charged cation. For example ferric is Fe3+ and ferrous is Fe2+.
If the cation is a "simple" cation the cation is simply the name of the element.
If the cation is a polyatomic you use the name that you have memorized. However, since we only talk about one polyatomic type II cation this should not prove to be difficult. Hg22+ is mercury (I).
The anion is named second.
If the anion is a simple ion it takes its name from the root name of the element , and -ide is added.
If the anion is a polyatomic anion you use the name that you have memorized.


Keep in mind, nomenclature rules give a guideline for the formal name of a compound. But there are many compounds with common names that have no convention. Make sure to include this information. That the results will not give common names. (i.e. NO is often called nitric oxide, its formal name based off the guidelines  is nitrogen monoxide. Similarly, N2O is known as nitrous oxide even though our rules would specify the name dinitrogen monoxide. (And H2O is usually called water, not dihydrogen monoxide.)

Summary:
categories: Inorganic Compounds (principle element is not carbon) and Organic Compounds (carbon is principle element). Organic compounds have different nomenclature.
Binary compounds have the simplest naming rules but they differ between:
Binary acid compounds
Binary ionic compounds
Binary covalent/molecular compounds.

Some ionic compounds are made of metals that can have different charges. (Roman Numerals)
Molecular/Covalent compounds can have different ratios of elements. (Greek Prefixes)
Ionic Hydrates ( ⦁ nH2O === “greekPrefix for n + ‘-hydrate’)

Inorganic Ionic Compounds
Prefixes are not used when naming ionic compounds
if the metal forms only one type of ion, which has a fixed charge. All elements in the first 2 families and a few elements in groups 3 through 13. (Type I cation)
if the metal forms more than one type of ion, where the charge varies. (typically from transition metal) (Type II cation)
Roman numerals specify the charge of the metal ion.	
The charge is determined from the compound’s formula and the charge of the anion.
		Out-of-Date nomenclature would use -ic and -ous suffixes to identify the higher and lower charged 
Is it monatomic or polyatomic?
Is it an ionic hydrate where water molecules are an integral component? 
Some ionic compounds also exist as a hydrate. The non hydrated version of the compound is known as the anhydrous compound, the regularly named compound with no water molecules attached. 
The name of the hydrated version is the regular anhydrous name + “greekPrefix-’hydrate’”, where the number of water molecules is represented by the greek prefix. Ionic hydrates can be identified by its formula: 	anhydrousCompound⦁ nH2O,	where n is the number of water molecules.
	
Inorganic Molecular/Covalent Compounds
The more positive element is named first. The more metallic element, located further to the left on the periodic table or at the bottom of the table and has a lower group number.. 
Except when the compound contains oxygen and a halogen, the name of the halogen goes first.

The more negative element is named as if it were an anion. Will end in “-ide”

Prefixes are used to denote the number of each of the elements involved. (The prefix mono is not used with the first element.)

Is it an Acid?
Is the anion monatomic or polyatomic? If the anion is monatomic, then it's a binary acid. If the anion is polyatomic, it's an oxyacid.
Binary Acid - The compound formula begins with hydrogen, H, and is followed by (aq). The acid name is derived from the name of the other element and is prefixed by “hydro-”, for hydrogen, and will have an “-ic” suffix. 
Oxyacid -  An acid that contains oxygen. The compound formula contains Hydrogen, H, and followed by the anion which is a  polyatomic ion containing Oxygen, O. 
Determine the name of the anion.
In this case, the hydrogen is not named at all, the acid is named after the anion. If the anion’s name ends in “-ate”, the acid name ends in “-ic”. If it ends in “-ite” then the acid name ends in “-ous”.



source: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/chemistryformajors/chapter/chemical-nomenclature/

Inorganic Ionic and Molecular compounds.

	Ionic: formed when a metal reacts with a nonmetal (or a polyatomic ion).

Binary Ionic Compounds: compounds typically consist of a metal and a nonmetal. 
The name of the metal is written first, followed by the name of the nonmetal with its ending changed to –ide.
Binary Ionic Compound with only monatomic ions: cation name (name of first element, which should be metal) + anion name (name of nonmetallic element) with its ending replaced by the suffix "-ide"

Metal Ion with Variable Charge (typically Transition Metals): If the metal can form ions with different charges, a Roman numeral in parentheses follows the name of the metal to specify its charge.
Several exceptions apply to the Roman numeral assignment: Aluminum, Zinc, and Silver. Although they belong to the transition metal category, these metals do not have Roman numerals written after their names because these metals only exist in one ion.

Instead of using Roman numerals, the different ions can also be presented in plain words. The metal is changed to end in –ous or –ic.

-ous ending is used for the lower oxidation state: the ion of the transition metal that has the lower charge
-ic ending is used for the higher oxidation state: the one with the higher charge. 

An ion with a higher charge will have a higher roman numeral. This requires knowledge about the different ions that can be formed.

Polyatomic Ions often have a common name that they are more associated with that don’t follow nomenclature rules.


	Molecular (or Covalent): formed when two nonmetals react with each other.
	considerations: Molecular compounds can form compounds with different ratios of their elements. (determines prefix)

Compounds that can have varying ratios of elements: are named with a prefix specifying the number of atoms of each element in a molecule of that compound. 
Acids: Contains hydrogen. A quick way to identify acids is to see if there is an H (denoting hydrogen) in front of the molecular formula of the compound. To name acids, the prefix hydro- is placed in front of the nonmetal modified to end with –ic. The state of acids is aqueous (aq) because acids are found in water.
Binary Acids  : named using the prefix hydro-, changing the –ide suffix to –ic, and adding “acid;”	
Oxyacids: Oxyacids are named by changing the ending of the anion to –ic, and adding “acid;”	
Aqueous Acids:
To combine the topic of acids and polyatomic ions, there is nomenclature of aqueous acids. Such acids include sulfuric acid (H2SO4) or carbonic acid (H2CO3). To name them, follow these quick, simple rules:

If the ion ends in -ate and is added with an acid, the acid name will have an -ic ending. Examples: nitrate ion (NO3-) + H+ (denoting formation of acid) = nitric acid (HNO3)
If the ion ends in -ite and is added with an acid, then the acid name will have an -ous ending. Example: nitrite ion (NO2-) + H+ (denoting formation of acid) = nitrous acid (HNO2)





If the compound has metal and nonmetal elements, the first element is the metal followed by the nonmetal. Metals are named first and its name is unchanged. If both elements are nonmetal, then the element furthest to the left of the periodic table is named first.

(!)Rules:
To organize all the rules, I need to know what categories exist for compounds.


(category: Binary Covalent Bonds)
1. The general rule in deciding what element is named first is:
The element with the lower group number is written first. 
Except when the compound contains oxygen and a halogen, the name of the halogen goes first.

IONIC COMPOUNDS
Compounds made of a metal and nonmetal
(category: Only has Monatomic ions)
1. If the compound is binary with monatomic ions, the compound name is:
    cation name (name of first element, which should be metal) + anion name (name of nonmetallic element) with its ending replaced by the suffix "-ide"


NaCl, sodium chloride
Na2O, sodium oxide
KBr, potassium bromide
CdS, cadmium sulfide
CaI2, calcium iodide
Mg3N2, magnesium nitride
CsF, cesium fluoride
Ca3P2, calcium phosphide
LiCl, lithium chloride
Al4C3, aluminum carbide



(category: Has Polyatomic ions)
1. Compounds containing polyatomic ions are named similarly to those containing only monatomic ions, except there is no need to change to an –ide ending, since the suffix is already present in the name of the anion.
(?) Then what are the naming rules for the anion? How is the C2H3O2    part of KC2H3O2  called “acetate”?
Polyatomic Anions in this group containing oxygen are referred to as oxyanions and are all named with an -ate or -ite ending

 
KC2H3O2, potassium acetate
(NH4)Cl, ammonium chloride
NaHCO3, sodium bicarbonate
CaSO4, calcium sulfate
Al2(CO3)3, aluminum carbonate
Mg3(PO4)2, magnesium phosphate


(category: Containing a Metal Ion with a Variable Charge)

Most of the transition metals can form two or more cations with different charges. Compounds of these metals with nonmetals are named with the same method as compounds in the first category, except the charge of the metal ion is specified by a Roman numeral in parentheses after the name of the metal. The charge of the metal ion is determined from the formula of the compound and the charge of the anion.  the charge of the metal ion is included as a Roman numeral in parentheses immediately following the metal name.

(Out-of-date nomenclature used the suffixes –ic and –ous to designate metals with higher and lower charges. Iron(III) chloride, FeCl3, was previously called ferric chloride, and iron(II) chloride, FeCl2, was known as ferrous chloride.)


Transition Metal Ionic Compound
Name
FeCl2
iron(II) chloride
FeCl3
iron(III) chloride
Hg2O
mercury(I) oxide
HgO
mercury(II) oxide
SnF2
tin(II) flouride
SnF4
tin(IV) flouride


(category: Ionic Hydrates)

Ionic compounds that contain water molecules as integral components of their crystals are called hydrates. The name for an ionic hydrate is derived by adding a term to the name for the anhydrous (meaning “not hydrated”) compound that indicates the number of water molecules associated with each formula unit of the compound. The added word begins with a Greek prefix denoting the number of water molecules (see Table 5) and ends with “hydrate.”
Formulas for ionic hydrates are written by appending a vertically centered dot, a coefficient representing the number of water molecules, and the formula for water.




Table 5. Nomenclature Prefixes
Number
Prefix


Number
Prefix
1 (sometimes omitted)
mono-


6
hexa-
2
di-


7
hepta-
3
tri-


8
octa-
4
tetra-


9
nona-
5
penta-


10
deca-


Molecular Covalent Compounds: 
The bonding characteristics of inorganic molecular compounds are different from ionic compounds, and they are named using a different system as well. 
The charges of cations and anions dictate their ratios in ionic compounds, so specifying the names of the ions provides sufficient information to determine chemical formulas. However, because covalent bonding allows for significant variation in the combination ratios of the atoms in a molecule, the names for molecular compounds must explicitly identify these ratios.

(category: Compounds with only 2 elements)
When two nonmetallic elements form a molecular compound, several combination ratios are often possible. So they must be specified in the name. The number of atoms of each element determine the prefix. The suffix is always “-ide”. The order of the compound name is determined by determining which element is more metallic (the element farther to the left of the table, and/or at the bottom of the table.
The more metallic element is named first, the second less metallic element is named second with its ending changed to “-ide”. 
The number of atoms determine the prefix of both the elements. So this affects the name of the first part of the compound. If there is only 1 atom of the first element is in the compound, then the “mono-” prefix is usually omitted. (are there exceptions?)
In other compounds where several combination ratios are not possible (fixed charge), the name of the first element doesn’t require a prefix.
N2O5
dinitrogen pentoxide

(category: Binary Acids = comprised of hydrogen and one other nonmetallic element)

 Many acids release hydrogen ions, H+, when dissolved in water. To denote this distinct chemical property, a mixture of water with an acid is given a name derived from the compound’s name.

The compound is only an acid when its dissolved in water. So these rules are for the aqueous form of the compound, which have an (aq) after the compound to specify this. The compound that’s in its gas form is given by a (g) following it. (?) Are all acids derived from a gaseous compound? And do all gaseous compounds contain hydrogen? And do all compounds that contain hydrogen considered a gas? Can’t be because H20, water, is not a gas? does H2O need to be identified with the (aq) specifier? What type of compounds need this distinction to determine its name?

The word “hydrogen” is changed to the prefix hydro-
The other nonmetallic element name is modified by adding the suffix –ic
The word “acid” is added as a second word
(category: Oxyacids = compounds that contain hydrogen, oxygen, and at least one other element, and are bonded in such a way as to impart acidic properties to the compound. Typical oxyacids consist of hydrogen combined with a polyatomic, oxygen-containing ion)
There are some exceptions to the general naming method (e.g., H2SO4 is called sulfuric acid, not sulfic acid, and H2SO3 is sulfurous, not sulfous, acid).
Omit “hydrogen”
Start with the root name of the anion
Replace –ate with –ic, or –ite with –ous
Add “acid”

Table 8. Names of Common Oxyacids
Formula
Anion Name
Acid Name
HC2H3O2
acetate
acetic acid
HNO3
nitrate
nitric acid
HNO2
nitrite
nitrous acid
HClO4
perchlorate
perchloric acid
H2CO3
carbonate
carbonic acid
H2SO4
sulfate
sulfuric acid
H2SO3
sulfite
sulfurous acid
H3PO4
phosphate
phosphoric acid


